<span class="init">[Dream]</span> I was looking down at a black chip I hold at hand, a chip like what people use in gambling houses. Everything sank into pure blackness except my arms and the chip I was holding. It was like a candle lighting up in darkness. The chip has some sort of symbol on it, which renders it of vitality. Someone was speaking to me. It was a man, but I don’t recall any details of him further. Even his voice is uncharacteristic insofar as it left no imprint in my memory. But I guess it means I was comfortable with his voice. 

That person said, “Life is only fun if you take a risk and play at the edge. But be careful that if you play too hard, you can lose your life.” I tossed the chip, wanted to express “got it” by complying with what he said, but failed to catch my chip. I felt calm even though the chip has fallen into the dark. I made no attempt to find my chip. (Up to now, it was me who held the chip and failed to catch it. Suddenly, however, I started to recognize myself as another person.) I realized that in “that man’s” efforts to live, that man happened to lose his life.

I woke up first crying and then laughing. The emotion that drove me to cry was sympathy. I found that person’s life ironic and tragic. He was innocently following the word and yet he lost his life. Then I started laughing hard because of the paradoxical core of the message. To be noted, there were no definitive words but only images for the message. I summarized the images into the sentence aforementioned. There were mainly two images going on parallel in my mind: 1) you have to use your chips until there is only one left. But once you lose the only chip you have, you would have none (in other words, you would die). 2) you have to play on the edge. But this also makes it easier to push oneself over the edge. As I woke up, I tried to take a note of the dream and delineate why I found the dream so funny, ending up feeling confused since it barely makes sense as a joke.