<span class="init">[Dream]</span> It began with some fantasy story. I was on a secret mission with one partner, which is all I can recall. Then I was happily chatting with that partner in a public bath, which is also common in China. The partner disappeared and my father entered the view. He was searching for me. He wanted me to report to him where I go, but I was happy having my own time. He walked towards me through the bath. I was embarrassed by his somehow muscular attitude. (Blaming his child, me, in the public. However, in reality, my father is rather restrained in the public.)

Right afterward, I was in my home in China. My father was lecturing me. I argued back. He took a stick and later a knife, threatening to beat me. I fought back and yelled at him: (also where I woke up)

> “You are basically saying two things: I do not own anything in this house. (And I cannot earn any money by myself. You just want me to die!)”

In parentheses is what I haven’t said yet in the dream, where I woke up. The first point is a general feeling I always have and I think there were times when my father was lecturing me, he had said this kind of words. (Nothing in this home belongs to me.) Interestingly, I can’t make sense of the second point. It does not make sense why I can’t earn money by myself, and how my father is related to this. 

On a later note, it occurs to me, as misleading as this might be, that if I have to localize these two unnatural elements in my dream (embarrassment and “you can’t earn money”), it would be from my mother. It is my mother who used to lecture me in the public, and always talks about my major and potential occupations. (“Can you find a job studying philosophy?”, etc.) That is to say, the sense of weirdness derives from the displacement of my mother with my father as if the aggressiveness towards my mother should be repressed. 

I have questioned myself since long before why I barely see my mother showing up in my dreams. My father is rather that old totalitarian figure (“Go visit your grandpa no matter what!”). The rule is clear. No abyss of other’s desire. It leaves my private sphere of desire and subjectivity untouched. I am actually doing well with my father recently. It is rather my mother who I think I should be angry with, but I can’t feel the anger.