<span class="init">[Dream]</span> I was traveling with my high school classmates in Japan. It was a school trip. We were packing and going to fly back to China. Somehow I had *a lot of* baggage, to the extent that there is no way I can carry it all by myself. I felt anxious about whether I could pack everything in time while walking around the entrance of the hotel we lived in and observing what everyone else was doing at the time. Some were already taking buses that go to the airport; some seemed to have already packed everything, playing together and waiting to leave. I didn’t know what I should do, what is the schedule. I felt left alone.[^This impotent gaze is a common element in my dream. I was wandering around, having no interaction with others. Why did I not simply ask others what I should do? Am I confronted with the fact that there is in the Other no signifier that can answer for (*répondre de*) what I am? It is a gaze in the case of my nonexistence, the pure *cogito* designating the very point at which I lose my symbolic identity. Suffice to recall Frank Capra’s *It’s a Wonderful Life* in which the hero witnesses how things might have turned out in the case of his nonexistence, or Hitchcock’s *Rear Window* in which the hero is immobilized only to observe from the window what is happening. Is this not the exemplary outcome of Descartes’ *"Cogito, ergo sum"*, that only at the expense of being, deprived of the identity, the subject can make the choice of thinking.]

“There is no time to wonder,” it occurred to me, “I have to pack right now.” I entered the hotel. It was a tall building, gorgeous and complex, like a maze. The only clue preventing me from getting lost is my room number.[^It is so Kafkaesque!] It felt like even though we all lived in the same building, we were separated, forced to shelter ourselves in our own rooms, and forbidden from visiting each other in the hotel. I entered the elevator, accompanied by two male peers. Although I felt a little annoyed by their masculine attitudes, I chose to play along with their phantasm.[^Another common element in my dreams. Masculinity for me refers to a very specific definition, irrelevant to the actual gender.] Occupied by the conversation, I missed my stop. I got out as soon as I could. Somehow the elevator turned into a minibus, and the outside was not a floor in the hotel, but the east side of Shonandai station. (It felt natural to me in the dream.) 

I wanted to go to the west side of the station. The road was not the asphalt road, but a mud ground full of little rocks and glass flakes. Bare feet, I was nervous if I would hurt myself. However, I managed to run towards the station without hurting myself. Once I got over this obstacle of how to go to the other side of the station, I started thinking aimlessly (like in shower time). I felt like I want to try new things, to be flexible, yet there is a limit. Myself appeared transparent to my gaze, allowing me to see what I am consisted of. I saw three cloud-like clusters of energies: to eat, to sleep, to think (There is no word that appeared in my dream to represent the last one. It is neither “to read books” nor “to study philosophy”, no signifier to engender identification. It is a sense of urgency without an aim.) There is no extra part of me which I can alter. I wanted to turn to Niina for help, but immediately I gave up this thought. Maybe there is no answer. Reflecting as I am writing down this dream, I don’t think I felt helpless. 