---
title: From Maternal Thing…
date: 2021-05-13
---

I appreciate Lacan’s typological theory for its simplicity. There are an overwhelming amount of examples, personal and not, that I would like to include in the following article. But fear not. They are all present only insofar as to elucidate one insight that, in Lacanian terms, the Real is a hole in the Symbolic, which functions so long as the Real is repressed. In other words, the Real is a concealed exception that makes the Symbolic (appear to be) *All.* If the subject encounters the traumatic Real Thing, however, the subject collapses and falls into anxiety (*angoisse*). 

Suffice to recall Freud’s own experience of anxiety, the dream of Irma’s injection, as an appetizer in our journey of inquiry. The dream can be divided into two part. In the first part, Freud is driven by the desire to know, struggling against Irma’s resistances. This, however, soon ends with Freud’s peer into Irma’s open mouth: Freud discovers something horrible and uncanny, which is supposed to remain hidden.

> “There's a horrendous discovery here, that of the flesh one never sees, the foundation of things, the other side of the head, of the face, the secretory glands par excellence, the flesh from which everything exudes, at the very heart of the mystery, the flesh in as much as it is suffering, is formless, in as much as its form in itself is something which provokes anxiety.”

Immediately Freud flees from this abrupt discovery. The dream transforms into a comforting symbolic space. With Freud’s analyst friends, they exchanges excuses about the failure of the treatment. Freud turns away from the Real in the disguise of the primordial flesh, the palpitation of the life substance in its loathsome dimension of the cancerous growth. Freud no longer desires to know. Now it is rather a desire *not* to know that motivates Freud’s symbolic exchange with his friends. 

As absurd as the dream sounds (to me, at least), somehow I can resonate with the structure of the dream: elements such as flesh, over-proximity, and the feeling of being devoured. My childhood is marked with some grayness, being beaten by my father and crying secretly everyday. Not surprisingly, as a child, I didn’t like my father and grew my emotional dependence on my mother. One night, unable to endure everything, I cried heavily, saying to my mother that I don’t like my father, that I cry everyday, that I don’t want to live with him. All of a sudden — I remember this scene with strangeness, as if it was not my memory — my mother laughed. Not a slight and accidental slip of laughter, but a laughter as if dominated by madness, as if I just said something so absurd. That day ended in silence. My father came to the room and I felt relieved. I have never talked about what happened that day with my mother again. 

Would it make sense to you if I conclude from this past episode that my mother *enjoys* me? The love from parents is considered as a universal rule, not in the sense that every child has the fortune to have a family filled with love, but in the sense that it is a rule on which people make evaluations. Success or failure, the law of parental love regulates the mutual relationship, making its demand of a purity of underflowing desires. In my attempts to “kill” my father, to replace my father, what I encountered im-mediately[^That is to say, not mediated by the father’s law and inhibition], in contrast, feels like a raw substance of mOther’s desire in its abyss. Instead of “my mother love/does not love me”, a relationship of positivity or negativity, it is a non-relationship, an impossible relationship. From the lovely figure of mother the caretaker broke out the indestructible, vital, and monstrous drive, the libidinal energy, like the the unrepresentable and all devouring monster of Scott's *Alien*, trembling and shaking to pieces my identity, which situated itself in accordance to a loving mother.

I used to study feminism. With no intention to neglect the significance of feminism in-itself, there are several personal incentives I have to admit. We are already well familiar with the drive to theorize things and achieve the ideal. But in the end, am I not searching for a positive ground for the groundless sexual relationship? We can also see this endeavor in recent feminism activities that advocate sexual consent, to overlay a neat-and-tidy intelligible egalitarian language of social justice over the dark, discomforting, relentlessly cruel, traumatic realm of sexuality. The intersubjective sexual relationship, however, is excessively groundless, not controlled by our rational conscious mind. People do not know what they want, they are disturbed by what they desire, they desire things that they hate, and *ad infinitum…* 

My girlfriend Q back then was passionate with feminism. We had very different needs. She was afraid of commitments and tended to keep a distance, while I felt anxious and lacked the sense of safety. In the conflicts of our needs, she alway brought about what is right to do. (i.e., “refusal is prior to desire” was one of the rules she claimed.) Naturally, I set out to find justifications for my desire.[^As for now, I think every little desires, the raw pre-symbolic energies, is already just in-itself, thus requiring no justification.] What I found, on a melancholic turn, is the failure of justification, of grounding the groundless. I was left with the fragile and free-floating structure of our symbolic ideals, ridden with an endless self-doubt. At that time, what confused me is how to have sexual relationships of mutual free wills. Since our patriarchal culture is merely a social construct and (if) we are all victims of the culture, our actions are also influenced by such culture and there seems to be no way to establish a neutral point without the guilt of potentially exploiting others.[^Of course, in theories I found no answer to this conundrum. This impelled my entrance into philosophy, not to find an answer, but to render this deadlock as such, to delineate the ontological impossibility.]